Summary

The Universal Thermal Climate Index UTCI in Operational Use
For the past four years the European Union has funded within the COST Action 730 the development of the Universal Thermal Climate Index UTCI. This enforced the efforts of ISB Commission 6 on UTCI which already started in 2000. 
The term “universal” must be understood in terms of appropriate for all assessments of the outdoor thermal conditions in the major fields of human biometeorology such as public weather service, public health system, precautionary planning, and climate impact research in the health sector. UTCI should become an international standard based on recent scientific progress in human response related thermo-physiological modelling.
After accessible models of human thermoregulation had been evaluated, the advanced multi-node ‘Fiala’ thermoregulation model was selected, extensively validated, and extended for purposes of the project. In the next step a state-of-the-art adaptive clothing model was developed and integrated. This model considers (i) the behavioural adaptation of clothing insulation observed for the general urban population in relation to the actual environmental temperature, (ii) the distribution of the clothing over different body parts providing local insulation values for the different model segments, and (iii) the reduction of thermal and evaporative clothing resistances caused by wind and the movement of the wearer, who was assumed walking 4 km/h on the level.
UTCI was then developed following the concept of an equivalent temperature. This involved the definition of a reference environment with 50% relative humidity (but not exceeding 20 hPa), with still air and radiant temperature equalling air temperature, to which all other climatic conditions are compared. Equal physiological conditions are based on the equivalence of the dynamic physiological response predicted by the model for the actual and the reference environment. As this dynamic response is multidimensional (body core temperature, sweat rate, skin wettedness etc at different exposure times), a single dimensional strain index was calculated by principal component analysis. The UTCI equivalent temperature for a given combination of wind, radiation, humidity and air temperature is then defined as the air temperature of the reference environment which produces the same strain index value.
The associated assessment scale was derived from the simulated physiological responses and comprises ten thermal stress categories ranging from extreme cold stress to extreme heat stress.
As calculating the UTCI equivalent temperatures by running the thermoregulation model repeatedly could be too time-consuming for climate simulations and numerical weather forecasts, several options to speed up this calculation were considered. In the first instance polynomial regression equations predicting the UTCI equivalent temperature values are available as an operational procedure which is accessible both as software source code and executable program at the project’s website ( HYPERLINK "http://www.utci.org" www.utci.org). Comparisons to existing thermal stress/strain assessment procedures showed good conformity. However, in contrast to these procedures, UTCI is based on contemporary science.
The difficulties of different meteorological data levels (observations, numerical simulations, etc.), particularly with respect to the calculation of mean radiant temperature, were also assessed. Potential applications were identified in the fields of public weather services, public health systems, urban planning, tourism & recreation and climate impact research. It is recommended to run the UTCI model for the fundamental application in Numerical Weather Predictions and climate assessments operationally in Regional Specialised Meteorological Centres or Regional Climate Centres, respectively.

Freiburg, Germany, October 15, 2009
Prof Dr Gerd Jendritzky on behalf of the co- and WG chairs George Havenith, UK, Richard de Dear, AU, Philipp Weihs, AT, Ekaterina Batchvarova, BG, plus the MC members and experts.

